---
layout: post
title:  "What is ChatGPT and how can you use it?"
date:   2023-02-15 14:31:20 +0100
categories: jekyll update
featured_image: /images/open_ai.png
---

<b/>

ChatGPT is an advanced conversational AI developed by the the company OpenAI. It launched in November 2022 and was built using
OpenAI's GPT-3 large language model and has been fine-tuned using supervised learning and reinforcement learning. In this blog post I will cover topics and try to answers questions such as:

- What is chatGPT?

- What makes chatGPT different from other conversational AIs?

- What can chatGPT actually do?

- How is chatGPT built and trained?

- What are the flaws and limitations of chatGPT? 

### What is chatGPT?

### What makes chatGPT different from other conversational AIs?

### What can chatGPT actually do?

### How was chatGPT built and trained?

### What are the flaws and limitations of chatGPT?





Introduction:
- What is chatGpt?
ChatGPT is an advanced conversational AI developed by OpenAI and launched in November 2022. It was built with OpenAI's GPT-3 family
of large language models and has been fine-tuned using supervised learning and reinforcement learning.

- What makes ChatGPT different from other chatbots?
Its ability to carry full-fledged conversations with the user. Apart from being able to analyze your questions and respond to them, it can
remember your previous responses and answer with natural every day language. Having a conversation with ChatGPT truly feels like a human conversation.


- What can chatGPT do?
ChatGPT is a powerful conversational AI. According to OpenAI it can answer followup questions, admit its mistakes, challenge incorrect premises and reject inappropriate requests.

More specifically chatGPT can be used to:

- Answer questions and follow up questions.
- Summarize text.
- Proof-read text.
- Generate drafts
- Format text.
- Explain concepts from virtually any domain.
- Explain code.
- Write code.
- Find errors in code.
 etc.....


Theory:

Generative AI

- How is chatGPT built?

using GPT-3.5 (Generative Pre-Trained Transformers)

what is GPT-3?

-its an autoregressive language model developed by OpenAI
-trained on a dataset of 45TB of text data (wikipedia, books, webpages) (300 billion tokens)
- 175 billion parameters
-trained using next word prediction
- 96 transformer decoder layers




what is Transformers?
- Its a type of neural network architecture
- Three things that make transformers work very well:
  - positionl encoding
  - attention
  - self-attention



- How was chatGPT trained?

using RLHF (Reinforcement Learning Through Human Feedback)

Chat GPT can attend to about 3000 words of prior context (this is its memory)

1) Generative pre-training (GPT-3)
Using next word predictions
This is where we build the foundation and allow the model to learn sophisticated probabilistic dependencies between words, sentences and paragraph.

2) Supervised fine-tuning
Alignment problem, the previous step is designed to complete user input sentence, not answer or explain.

This done by humans acting as both the user and chatbot to provide data for the model.

Each training example consists of a particular conversation history and the next response.
Train the model by making it 


3) RLHF
The model is further fine-tuned with reinforcement learning.

1. AI trainers first have conversations with current model
2. Then for any given model repsonse, a set of alternative responses are also sampled and a humna labeler ranks the responses
from most to least prefered response.




- What data has chatGPT been trained on?
- What are the limiatations of ChatGPT?


How can you use chatGPT?
- coding
- writing



#### References:

<a href="https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/">https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/</a>


<a href="https://kripeshadwani.com/chatgpt-explained/">https://kripeshadwani.com/chatgpt-explained/</a>
